---
layout: post
published: true
title: Sudoku
date: '2016-09-15'
tags:
  - fundamentals
  - algorithms
  - applied computer science
subtitle: A-Level Project
---
A Sudoku is a logic-based number placement puzzle game. The objective is to fill a 9x9 grid so that each column, row, and nine 3x3 sub-boxes contain the digits from 1 through 9, only using each digit once. A correct Sudoku solution is partially covered so that an individual can solve the rest of the numbers.


*See project [here](https://www.samnayak.com/projects/sudoku/)*


# Keywords

- Algorithm:  A step-by-step procedure for performing a calculation.
- Sudoku: A number placement puzzle game where the objective is to fill a 9x9 grid with numbers. For information: see above.


# User Documentation


## What is it and how to use it


To select a specific square/box on the Sudoku, you can directly click on it or you can navigate to it using your arrow keys. Once selected, the box should be highlighted blue to signify you are currently on this box. Use your keyboard to enter a number from 1-9 [123456789] in the box. If you make a mistake, you can delete it by selecting the box and using the backspace button on your keyboard. You can also replace the current number in the box by selecting another number. The arrow keys will allow you to traverse the Sudoku freely but will skip (miss) the unclickable grey boxes, allowing you to navigate to empty white boxes.

White boxes indicate an empty box and can be selected or modified. Grey boxes indicate a fixed position or *full box* and cannot be selected or modified. 


Your progress on the site is maintained with cookies, so that you can keep your score. If you delete or modify your cookies, the progress will change on the site.


## The Options

Size:

The size of the Sudoku is modifiable and is dynamically changable. The size is represented by the horizontal (width) and vertical (height) length of the Sudoku. The size is measured in pixels and changing the size will change every box on the board by the current pixel size. The limits for the size are 10 <= x <= 80 on both axes.


Buttons:

- **New Game: **This button will clear the board and generate a partially solved Sudoku or an empty board depending on which generation algorithm you have entered.
- **Validate: **This button will validate the current state of the Sudoku. If there are empty spaces, it will automatically invalidate the Sudoku. It will bring up a windows dialog box whether the entered solution is valid or not. If it isn't, the timer will continue, otherwise the timer will stop and you have completed the Sudoku.
- **Restart: **The restart button will reset the clock and will remove all user entered numbers from the board.
- **Show Solution: **This will reveal the correct answer/solution to the Sudoku which has been generated manually or automatically. *Note: Once clicked, you cannot restart or validate the Sudoku -- this is to prevent cheating--.*
- **Show Statistics: **This will bring up an alert windows dialog box which will display your current statistics of: games played; correct solutions; shortest time; revealed solutions. This is dependent on your local cookies and will change if you delete your cookies.
- **Show Rules: **This will bring up an alert windows dialog box which will inform you of the rules of how to play.

Difficulty:

The difficulty settings change the quantity of squares revealed. The harder the difficulty, the less squares revealed.

- **Easy: **This mode of difficulty is for beginners and most of the boxes will be revealed.
- **Medium: **This mode of difficulty is for the average player, where roughly a quarter of the boxes will be revealed. This is the default difficulty setting.
- **Hard: **This mode of difficulty is for more experienced players, where very few boxes will be revealed.


Timer:

The timer indicates how long you have taken on a specific Sudoku board. The timer will start as soon as you click "New Game", will clear once a new game has started, and will stop once the Sudoku has been completed.



### Random Generation

This options is for when you want to complete a randomly generated Sudoku. 

1. If the "Random Generation" tickbox is not already checked, check it.
2. If you would like to change the difficulty of the Sudoku, go to the difficulty section and click on the tickbox which accommodate for your specific skill set. More information on the difficulties can be seen below.
3. Click the "New Game" button, which will clear the current board and will replace it with a randomly generated board.


### Manual Input

This option is for when you have a partially entered sudoku and you would like to see the solution for that sudoku. 

1. First, click the "Manual Input" tickbox.
2. Then click the "New Game button.
3. Enter all the numbers into the designated boxes. If you make a mistake, you can erase that number by clicking in the same box and deleting it with backspace. 
4. Once done, click "Show Solution" to reveal the rest of the numbers.

If you want to change your input after seeing the solution, you can click the "Restart button". This will remove all the numbers solved, leaving the numbers you have already entered in.




# Technical Documentation


